<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-2-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The same.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess of France</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosaline</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Maria</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Katharine</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lords</b>, and other Attendants.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, madam, summon up your dearest spirits:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Consider who the king your father sends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To whom he sends, and what’s his embassy:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yourself, held precious in the world’s esteem,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To parley with the sole inheritor</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of all perfections that a man may owe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Matchless Navarre; the plea of no less weight</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than Aquitaine, a dowry for a queen.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be now as prodigal of all dear grace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As Nature was in making graces dear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When she did starve the general world beside</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And prodigally gave them all to you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Good Lord Boyet, my beauty, though but mean,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Needs not the painted flourish of your praise:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beauty is bought by judgement of the eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not utter’d by base sale of chapmen’s tongues:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am less proud to hear you tell my worth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than you much willing to be counted wise</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In spending your wit in the praise of mine.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But now to task the tasker: good Boyet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are not ignorant, all-telling fame</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth noise abroad, Navarre hath made a vow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till painful study shall outwear three years,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No woman may approach his silent court:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore to’s seemeth it a needful course,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before we enter his forbidden gates,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To know his pleasure; and in that behalf,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bold of your worthiness, we single you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As our best-moving fair solicitor.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell him, the daughter of the King of France,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On serious business, craving quick dispatch,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Importunes personal conference with his grace:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Haste, signify so much; while we attend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like humble-visaged suitors, his high will.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td>Proud of employment, willingly I go.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>All pride is willing pride, and yours is so. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who are the votaries, my loving lords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That are vow-fellows with this virtuous duke?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Lord</td>
							<td>Lord Longaville is one.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td>Know you the man?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Maria</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I know him, madam: at a marriage-feast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Between Lord Perigort and the beauteous heir</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Jaques Falconbridge, solemnized</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In Normandy, saw I this Longaville:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A man of sovereign parts he is esteem’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well fitted in arts, glorious in arms:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nothing becomes him ill that he would well.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The only soil of his fair virtue’s gloss,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If virtue’s gloss will stain with any soil,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is a sharp wit matched with too blunt a will;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose edge hath power to cut, whose will still wills</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It should none spare that come within his power.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td>Some merry mocking lord, belike; is’t so?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Maria</td>
							<td>They say so most that most his humours know.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Such short-lived wits do wither as they grow.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who are the rest?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Katharine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The young Dumain, a well-accomplished youth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of all that virtue love for virtue loved:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Most power to do most harm, least knowing ill;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For he hath wit to make an ill shape good,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And shape to win grace though he had no wit.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I saw him at the Duke Alencon’s once;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And much too little of that good I saw</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is my report to his great worthiness.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosaline</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Another of these students at that time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was there with him, if I have heard a truth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Biron they call him; but a merrier man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within the limit of becoming mirth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I never spent an hour’s talk withal:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His eye begets occasion for his wit;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For every object that the one doth catch</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The other turns to a mirth-moving jest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which his fair tongue, conceit’s expositor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Delivers in such apt and gracious words</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That aged ears play truant at his tales</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And younger hearings are quite ravished;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So sweet and voluble is his discourse.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>God bless my ladies! are they all in love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That every one her own hath garnished</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With such bedecking ornaments of praise?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Lord</td>
							<td>Here comes Boyet.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td>Now, what admittance, lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Navarre had notice of your fair approach;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he and his competitors in oath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were all address’d to meet you, gentle lady,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before I came. Marry, thus much I have learnt:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He rather means to lodge you in the field,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like one that comes here to besiege his court,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than seek a dispensation for his oath,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To let you enter his unpeopled house.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here comes Navarre.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Longaville</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dumain</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</b>, and Attendants.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td>Fair princess, welcome to the court of Navarre.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td>‘Fair’ I give you back again; and ‘welcome’ I have not yet: the roof of this court is too high to be yours; and welcome to the wide fields too base to be mine.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td>You shall be welcome, madam, to my court.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td>I will be welcome, then: conduct me thither.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td>Hear me, dear lady; I have sworn an oath.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td>Our Lady help my lord! he’ll be forsworn.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td>Not for the world, fair madam, by my will.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td>Why, will shall break it; will and nothing else.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td>Your ladyship is ignorant what it is.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Were my lord so, his ignorance were wise,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I hear your grace hath sworn out house-keeping:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis deadly sin to keep that oath, my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sin to break it.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But pardon me. I am too sudden-bold:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To teach a teacher ill beseemeth me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And suddenly resolve me in my suit.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td>Madam, I will, if suddenly I may.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You will the sooner, that I were away;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For you’ll prove perjured if you make me stay.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</td>
							<td>Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosaline</td>
							<td>Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</td>
							<td>I know you did.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosaline</td>
							<td>How needless was it then to ask the question!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</td>
							<td>You must not be so quick.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosaline</td>
							<td>’Tis ’long of you that spur me with such questions.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</td>
							<td>Your wit’s too hot, it speeds too fast, ’twill tire.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosaline</td>
							<td>Not till it leave the rider in the mire.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</td>
							<td>What time o’ day?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosaline</td>
							<td>The hour that fools should ask.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</td>
							<td>Now fair befall your mask!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosaline</td>
							<td>Fair fall the face it covers!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</td>
							<td>And send you many lovers!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosaline</td>
							<td>Amen, so you be none.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</td>
							<td>Nay, then will I be gone.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Madam, your father here doth intimate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The payment of a hundred thousand crowns;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being but the one half of an entire sum</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Disbursed by my father in his wars.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But say that he or we, as neither have,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Received that sum, yet there remains unpaid</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A hundred thousand more; in surety of the which,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One part of Aquitaine is bound to us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Although not valued to the money’s worth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If then the king your father will restore</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that one half which is unsatisfied,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We will give up our right in Aquitaine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hold fair friendship with his majesty.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that, it seems, he little purposeth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For here he doth demand to have repaid</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A hundred thousand crowns; and not demands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On payment of a hundred thousand crowns,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To have his title live in Aquitaine;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which we much rather had depart withal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And have the money by our father lent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than Aquitaine so gelded as it is.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dear Princess, were not his requests so far</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From reason’s yielding, your fair self should make</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A yielding ’gainst some reason in my breast</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And go well satisfied to France again.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You do the king my father too much wrong</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wrong the reputation of your name,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In so unseeming to confess receipt</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of that which hath so faithfully been paid.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I do protest I never heard of it;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And if you prove it, I’ll repay it back</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or yield up Aquitaine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We arrest your word.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Boyet, you can produce acquittances</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For such a sum from special officers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Charles his father.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td>Satisfy me so.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So please your grace, the packet is not come</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where that and other specialties are bound:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To-morrow you shall have a sight of them.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It shall suffice me: at which interview</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All liberal reason I will yield unto.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Meantime receive such welcome at my hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As honour without breach of honour may</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make tender of to thy true worthiness:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You may not come, fair princess, in my gates;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But here without you shall be so received</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As you shall deem yourself lodged in my heart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though so denied fair harbour in my house.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your own good thoughts excuse me, and farewell:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To-morrow shall we visit you again.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td>Sweet health and fair desires consort your grace!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ferdinand</td>
							<td>Thy own wish wish I thee in every place! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</td>
							<td>Lady, I will commend you to mine own heart.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosaline</td>
							<td>Pray you, do my commendations; I would be glad to see it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</td>
							<td>I would you heard it groan.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosaline</td>
							<td>Is the fool sick?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</td>
							<td>Sick at the heart.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosaline</td>
							<td>Alack, let it blood.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</td>
							<td>Would that do it good?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosaline</td>
							<td>My physic says ‘ay.’</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</td>
							<td>Will you prick’t with your eye?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosaline</td>
							<td>No point, with my knife.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</td>
							<td>Now, God save thy life!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosaline</td>
							<td>And yours from long living!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</td>
							<td>I cannot stay thanksgiving. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Retiring.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dumain</td>
							<td>Sir, I pray you, a word: what lady is that same?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td>The heir of Alencon, Katharine her name.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Dumain</td>
							<td>A gallant lady. Monsieur, fare you well. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Longaville</td>
							<td>I beseech you a word: what is she in the white?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td>A woman sometimes, an you saw her in the light.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Longaville</td>
							<td>Perchance light in the light. I desire her name.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td>She hath but one for herself; to desire that were a shame.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Longaville</td>
							<td>Pray you, sir, whose daughter?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td>Her mother’s, I have heard.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Longaville</td>
							<td>God’s blessing on your beard!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Good sir, be not offended.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She is an heir of Falconbridge.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Longaville</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, my choler is ended.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She is a most sweet lady.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td>Not unlike, sir, that may be. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Longaville</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</td>
							<td>What’s her name in the cap?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td>Rosaline, by good hap.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</td>
							<td>Is she wedded or no?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td>To her will, sir, or so.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</td>
							<td>You are welcome, sir: adieu.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td>Farewell to me, sir, and welcome to you. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Biron</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Maria</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That last is Biron, the merry madcap lord:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not a word with him but a jest.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td>And every jest but a word.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td>It was well done of you to take him at his word.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td>I was as willing to grapple as he was to board.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Maria</td>
							<td>Two hot sheeps, marry.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And wherefore not ships?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No sheep, sweet lamb, unless we feed on your lips.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Maria</td>
							<td>You sheep, and I pasture: shall that finish the jest?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td>So you grant pasture for me. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Offering to kiss her.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Maria</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not so, gentle beast:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My lips are no common, though several they be.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td>Belonging to whom?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Maria</td>
							<td>To my fortunes and me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Good wits will be jangling; but, gentles, agree:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This civil war of wits were much better used</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On Navarre and his book-men; for here ’tis abused.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If my observation, which very seldom lies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By the heart’s still rhetoric disclosed with eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Deceive me not now, Navarre is infected.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td>With what?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td>With that which we lovers entitle affected.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td>Your reason?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, all his behaviors did make their retire</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His heart, like an agate, with your print impress’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Proud with his form, in his eye pride express’d:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His tongue, all impatient to speak and not see,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did stumble with haste in his eyesight to be;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All senses to that sense did make their repair,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To feel only looking on fairest of fair:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Methought all his senses were lock’d in his eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As jewels in crystal for some prince to buy;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, tendering their own worth from where they were glass’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did point you to buy them, along as you pass’d:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His face’s own margent did quote such amazes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll give you Aquitaine and all that is his,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An you give him for my sake but one loving kiss.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Princess</td>
							<td>Come to our pavilion: Boyet is disposed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But to speak that in words which his eye hath disclosed.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I only have made a mouth of his eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By adding a tongue which I know will not lie.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosaline</td>
							<td>Thou art an old love-monger and speakest skilfully.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Maria</td>
							<td>He is Cupid’s grandfather and learns news of him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosaline</td>
							<td>Then was Venus like her mother, for her father is but grim.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td>Do you hear, my mad wenches?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Maria</td>
							<td>No.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td>What then, do you see?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rosaline</td>
							<td>Ay, our way to be gone.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Boyet</td>
							<td>You are too hard for me. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
