<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-3-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The same.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO and MOTH</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>Warble, child; make passionate my sense of hearing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>Concolinel. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Singing</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>Sweet air! Go, tenderness of years; take this key, give enlargement to the swain, bring him festinately hither: I must employ him in a letter to my love.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>Master, will you win your love with a French brawl?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>How meanest thou? brawling in French?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>No, my complete master: but to jig off a tune at the tongue’s end, canary to it with your feet, humour it with turning up your eyelids, sigh a note and sing a note, sometime through the throat, as if you swallowed love with singing love, sometime through the nose, as if you snuffed up love by smelling love; with your hat penthouse-like o’er the shop of your eyes; with your arms crossed on your thin-belly doublet like a rabbit on a spit; or your hands in your pocket like a man after the old painting; and keep not too long in one tune, but a snip and away. These are complements, these are humours; these betray nice wenches, that would be betrayed without these; and make them men of note⁠—do you note me?⁠—that most are affected to these.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>How hast thou purchased this experience?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>By my penny of observation.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>But O⁠—but O⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>‘The hobby-horse is forgot.’</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>Callest thou my love ‘hobby-horse’?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>No, master; the hobby-horse is but a colt, and your love perhaps a hackney. But have you forgot your love?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>Almost I had.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>Negligent student! learn her by heart.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>By heart and in heart, boy.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>And out of heart, master: all those three I will prove.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>What wilt thou prove?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>A man, if I live; and this, by, in, and without, upon the instant: by heart you love her, because your heart cannot come by her; in heart you love her, because your heart is in love with her; and out of heart you love her, being out of heart that you cannot enjoy her.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>I am all these three.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>And three times as much more, and yet nothing at all.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>Fetch hither the swain: he must carry me a letter.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>A message well sympathized; a horse to be ambassador for an ass.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>Ha, ha! what sayest thou?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>Marry, sir, you must send the ass upon the horse, for he is very slow-gaited. But I go.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>The way is but short: away!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>As swift as lead, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The meaning, pretty ingenious?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is not lead a metal heavy, dull, and slow?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>Minime, honest master; or rather, master, no.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>I say lead is slow.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You are too swift, sir, to say so:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is that lead slow which is fired from a gun?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sweet smoke of rhetoric!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He reputes me a cannon; and the bullet, that’s he:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I shoot thee at the swain.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>Thump then and I flee. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A most acute juvenal; voluble and free of grace!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By thy favour, sweet welkin, I must sigh in thy face:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Most rude melancholy, valour gives thee place.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My herald is return’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter MOTH with COSTARD</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>A wonder, master! here’s a costard broken in a shin.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>Some enigma, some riddle: come, thy l’envoy; begin.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">COSTARD</td>
							<td>No enigma, no riddle, no l’envoy; no salve in the mail, sir: O, sir, plantain, a plain plantain! no l’envoy, no l’envoy; no salve, sir, but a plantain!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>By virtue, thou enforcest laughter; thy silly thought my spleen; the heaving of my lungs provokes me to ridiculous smiling. O, pardon me, my stars! Doth the inconsiderate take salve for l’envoy, and the word l’envoy for a salve?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>Do the wise think them other? is not l’envoy a salve?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, page: it is an epilogue or discourse, to make plain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some obscure precedence that hath tofore been sain.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will example it:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were still at odds, being but three.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There’s the moral. Now the l’envoy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>I will add the l’envoy. Say the moral again.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were still at odds, being but three.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Until the goose came out of door,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And stay’d the odds by adding four.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now will I begin your moral, and do you follow with my l’envoy.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were still at odds, being but three.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Until the goose came out of door,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Staying the odds by adding four.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>A good l’envoy, ending in the goose: would you desire more?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">COSTARD</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The boy hath sold him a bargain, a goose, that’s flat.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sir, your pennyworth is good, an your goose be fat.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let me see; a fat l’envoy; ay, that’s a fat goose.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>Come hither, come hither. How did this argument begin?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By saying that a costard was broken in a shin.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then call’d you for the l’envoy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">COSTARD</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>True, and I for a plantain: thus came your argument in;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then the boy’s fat l’envoy, the goose that you bought;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he ended the market.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>But tell me; how was there a costard broken in a shin?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>I will tell you sensibly.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">COSTARD</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou hast no feeling of it, Moth: I will speak that l’envoy:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I Costard, running out, that was safely within,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fell over the threshold and broke my shin.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>We will talk no more of this matter.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">COSTARD</td>
							<td>Till there be more matter in the shin.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>Sirrah Costard, I will enfranchise thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">COSTARD</td>
							<td>O, marry me to one Frances: I smell some l’envoy, some goose, in this.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>By my sweet soul, I mean setting thee at liberty, enfreedoming thy person; thou wert immured, restrained, captivated, bound.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">COSTARD</td>
							<td>True, true; and now you will be my purgation and let me loose.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">ADRIANO DE ARMADO</td>
							<td>I give thee thy liberty, set thee from durance; and, in lieu thereof, impose on thee nothing but this: bear this significant <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Giving a letter</i> to the country maid Jaquenetta: there is remuneration; for the best ward of mine honour is rewarding my dependents. Moth, follow. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">MOTH</td>
							<td>Like the sequel, I. Signior Costard, adieu.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">COSTARD</td>
							<td>My sweet ounce of man’s flesh! my incony Jew! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit MOTH</i> Now will I look to his remuneration. Remuneration! O, that’s the Latin word for three farthings: three farthings⁠—remuneration.⁠—‘What’s the price of this inkle?’⁠—‘One penny.’⁠—‘No, I’ll give you a remuneration:’ why, it carries it. Remuneration! why, it is a fairer name than French crown. I will never buy and sell out of this word.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter BIRON</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BIRON</td>
							<td>O, my good knave Costard! exceedingly well met.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">COSTARD</td>
							<td>Pray you, sir, how much carnation ribbon may a man buy for a remuneration?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BIRON</td>
							<td>What is a remuneration?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">COSTARD</td>
							<td>Marry, sir, halfpenny farthing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BIRON</td>
							<td>Why, then, three-farthing worth of silk.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">COSTARD</td>
							<td>I thank your worship: God be wi’ you!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BIRON</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Stay, slave; I must employ thee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As thou wilt win my favour, good my knave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do one thing for me that I shall entreat.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">COSTARD</td>
							<td>When would you have it done, sir?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BIRON</td>
							<td>This afternoon.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">COSTARD</td>
							<td>Well, I will do it, sir: fare you well.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BIRON</td>
							<td>Thou knowest not what it is.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">COSTARD</td>
							<td>I shall know, sir, when I have done it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BIRON</td>
							<td>Why, villain, thou must know first.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">COSTARD</td>
							<td>I will come to your worship to-morrow morning.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BIRON</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It must be done this afternoon.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hark, slave, it is but this:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The princess comes to hunt here in the park,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in her train there is a gentle lady;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Rosaline they call her: ask for her;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to her white hand see thou do commend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This seal’d-up counsel. There’s thy guerdon; go. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Giving him a shilling</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">COSTARD</td>
							<td>Gardon, O sweet gardon! better than remuneration, a’leven-pence farthing better: most sweet gardon! I will do it sir, in print. Gardon! Remuneration! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">BIRON</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And I, forsooth, in love! I, that have been love’s whip;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A very beadle to a humorous sigh;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A critic, nay, a night-watch constable;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A domineering pedant o’er the boy;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than whom no mortal so magnificent!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This whimpled, whining, purblind, wayward boy;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This senior-junior, giant-dwarf, Dan Cupid;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Regent of love-rhymes, lord of folded arms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The anointed sovereign of sighs and groans,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Liege of all loiterers and malcontents,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dread prince of plackets, king of codpieces,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sole imperator and great general</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of trotting ‘paritors:⁠—O my little heart:⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I to be a corporal of his field,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wear his colours like a tumbler’s hoop!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What, I! I love! I sue! I seek a wife!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A woman, that is like a German clock,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Still a-repairing, ever out of frame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And never going aright, being a watch,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But being watch’d that it may still go right!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nay, to be perjured, which is worst of all;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, among three, to love the worst of all;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A wightly wanton with a velvet brow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With two pitch-balls stuck in her face for eyes;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ay, and by heaven, one that will do the deed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though Argus were her eunuch and her guard:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I to sigh for her! to watch for her!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To pray for her! Go to; it is a plague</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Cupid will impose for my neglect</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of his almighty dreadful little might.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, sue and groan:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some men must love my lady and some Joan. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
